# Loan-Default
# Executive Summary 
## Problem 
Loans have become more than an ask from their parents or close friends for individuals to make a large purchase, loan lending has become a financial leverage that is very common in our daily lives. Loans help people to pay off high interest debts, save money, and invest on their own financial futures. Lending Club is a website that brings convenience by making loans accessible through online platform with peer-to-peer lenders. The loan lending services are very competitive in the financial industry, and especially under such technological advanced environment. 
Although it is profitable and beneficial for both the lenders and the borrowers. However, this service carries a great risk, which makes platforms like Lending Club endure a high operational stake. The loan risk essentially is the risk of borrowers default their loans, and thus the platform have to cover this financial loss. Therefore, it is crucial for industry experts to detect the likelihood of past-due before issuing loans to potential borrowers. On the other hand, the detection system must be tuned at a certain false positive rate (FPR) because by decreasing the number of risky loans issued, we are also decreasing the number of good ones and thus lose potential profit.
The goal of this project is to build a machine learning model for Lending Club that can predict if a customer will default on the loan based on the details of the loan and the customer’s financial background information provided. The model intends to make good predictions that help Lending Club’s detection system to act, and ultimately the system’s output will assist Lending Club to make decisions on issuing loans, so that the risk can be lowered, and the profit can be maximized.
## Key Findings  
*	Last payment amount is one of the most important variable in prediction default rate according to the best model. The breakdown profile indicates that the it has a 33.8% impact on the best prediction made. The boxplot below shows that the more payment made on the last payment, the less likely this borrower will default.
*	Smaller loans that stretch longer and are less qualified tend to be defaulted. The 60-month payment option offered by Lending Club has 2 times default rate of the 36-month payment option. The lower the grade, the higher the chance of default. A loan with grade A have less than 10% chance to be defaulted while a loan with grade G has more than 30% chance to be defaulted.  The graph below indicates that cases with lower funded amount and lower payment amount will likely to default. 
*	False negative cases can be extremely costly if the model systematically missed loans that are defaulted eventually. From local interpretation, the last payment date, lower boundary of fico range and dti (debt obligation ratios) have strong impact on the false negative cases.
Model Performance Summary & Interpretation 
This model has the highest testing AUC out of the 4 models, indicating that it performs best when making predictions. The red dash line on the ROC chart indicates the sweet spot of operating at a low FPR with a high TPR because the AUC is very close to 1. This model has a 0.847 testing recall rate. A model with the highest recall rate means that it will make the best predictions for the positive class. For example, out of 1000 defaulted cases, the model will correctly identify 847 of them. The precision rate of 0.832 indicates that if there are 1000 cases labeled “default”, 832 of them are actually defaulted. A high F1 score means that both precision and recall rates are relatively high. It is the “harmonious mean” of the 2 rates, and we want to balance the 2 to make sure that both are not too high. The operational rule is to detect default loans before it is defaulted at a 5% false positive rate (FPR) or lower. The best performing model allows operating at 5% FPR to leverage the tradeoff between FPR and recall (true positive rate) and finds the sweet spot that minimizes damage of making errors from both sides. The ROC chart for the best performing model above shows that false positive rate and recall are positively related to each other. The costing of missing a default loan is huge, so the recall should be as high as possible. Rising recall will cause the FPR to increase, and the costs of inspection increase as well. The best model sets the prediction score threshold to be 0.313. In other words, if a transaction has a 31.3% or higher probability of being past-due, the model marks the loan to be suspicious and askes the detection system to investigate and stop issuing this loan. There is a 5% chance that this suspicious case is a good loan. By operating at 5% FPR, the chart threshold vs TPR (recall) indicates that a threshold of 31.3% yields a 0.908 recall. That is, out of 1000 default loans, the model will correctly classify 908 of them. The chart also indicates that precision and recall are negatively related to each other. Therefore, the model yields a moderate precision rate when the recall rate is very high. The precision rate is 0.750, displayed in the chart precision vs recall. That is, out of 1000 transactions predicted as defaulted, 75% of them are correct classification. 
## Recommendations  
*	A combination of threshold settings Is recommended for Lending Club. 
  *	To operate at 5% FPR, the system will detect any loans as highly risky at 31.3% threshold. If the model predicts a loan to default with a chance of 31.3% or more likely, the system shuts down the process of issuing this loan completely. That is, out of 1000 actual current loans, the system will mistakenly detect 50 of them as fraud. It is a small number relative to the amount of successful loan cases. On the other hand, the system will capture a default loan with a 90.8% probability. In other words, out of 1000 actual default loans, we will capture 908 cases and lose 92 cases. Assume a loan has an average of $15,800. Lending Club will suffer a loss of $1,453,600 in revenue and potential loss with customer friction from making false positive mistakes. 
  *	To operate at 9% FPR, the system will detect any loans that predicted to be moderately risky at 0.191 threshold. If the model predicts a loan to default with a chance of 19.1% or more, the system sends out a warning to the lender. That is, our of 1000 actual current loans, the system will mistakenly detect 40 more of them compared to operating at 5% FPR. However, the system does not shut down the process. It simply sends out friendly warning messages to lenders. On the other hand, the system will capture a default loan with a 96.1% probability. In other words, out of 1000 actual default loans, we will capture 961 cases and lose only 39 cases. That is 53 cases less than operating at 5% FPR. These cases account for $616,200 of loss in revenue but operating at 9% FPR means that Lending Club will suffer less from making false positive rate by sending out reminders instead of shutting down the loans.
*	Any predictions that are below the threshold of 0.191 the system will pass as current loans. 
*	Lending Club should send out regular reminders to smaller loans that tend to stretch longer and are less qualified. These loans have higher chances to be defaulted. Also, Lending Club should do a credit check to those making smaller loans because these people have a higher chance to default loans and get away. 
*	Lending Club should investigate on payment with a longer period since last payment date, and reach out to users to see if the account is still active. It can build incentivization to give out investor fundings so that borrowers tend to stick with the platform. 
